                  The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Vol. 26 No. 4 (October 2001) 667±683




     Long-term Health and Social Care for the Elderly: An
                 International Perspective
                                            by Laurence Assous

     This paper describes how industrialized countries have taken different paths towards
     meeting the needs of their dependent elderly. Dependency-related needs come under the
     heading of social protection, since they involve general home help and medical care, even
     if homecare is essentially provided by members of the person's family. Thus, the diversity
     of medical care and social protection systems, their level, their ``Bismarckian'' or
     ``Beveridgian'' nature, has an impact on long-term care systems. We can therefore
     distinguish three main groups of countries that differ from an institutional point of view. In
     the future, because of demographic and sociological changes, it seems unlikely that family
     care could continue to play such an important spontaneous role, especially in the southern
     European countries.


1.    Introduction
      The most common consequence of population ageing is to destabilize the ®nancing of
pension schemes and healthcare systems. At the same time the rise in the proportion of very
elderly persons leads naturally to a rise in the proportion of individuals who are likely to ®nd
themselves in a state of dependency. Clearly the notion of dependency,1 which relates to the
notion of need for healthcare and also for home help, is intimately related to age.2
      This survey is based on the 15 Member States of the European Union, although it
occasionally refers to the situation in the United States, Canada and Japan. The major issues
relating to dependency coverage are analysed after a brief review of population ageing. Then
we examine dependency coverage from an institutional point of view before presenting the
various forms of coverage. In the last part we attempt to reply to questions relating to the
various types of long-term care bene®ts.

2.    Population ageing
     One of the prime indicators for measuring the potential pressure that the increasingly
ageing population brings to bear on care systems for the elderly is the rise in the proportion of

        This article is partly based on a working paper written together with Pierre Ralle (see References), to whom
the author extends her warmest thanks for the time he devoted to this survey and for all the advice he gave. Thanks are
also due to Christel Lolin, Mireille Elbaum, Marie-Eve JoeÈl, Nicole Kerschen and Ronan Mahieu for their useful
comments on the earlier versions of this paper.
        Atthetimeofpreparationofthisarticle,theauthorwasaneconomistoftheMinistryofSocialAffairs,DREES.
       1
          The notion of ``dependency'' is very often used in France. In other countries, the concept is rather one of
``long-term care''. This article uses both terms.
       2
          Frequency of dependency rises sharply with age, with a break between the ages of 80 and 85 (Badeyan and
Colin, 1999). But the notion of dependency is not necessarily related to age. In most countries (except for France
where the of®cial political view is that dependent persons aged under 60 are handicapped), dependency is seen as a
risk that could arise at any age.



                                                         # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
                                                         Published by Blackwell Publishers, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK.
668                                                                                                                                                                                           ASSOUS


persons aged 80 and over in the population as a whole. In the 18 countries in this survey the
proportion of over-80s has increased over the last 40 years or so. In 1960 the proportion of
over-80s in the relevant countries was between 0.7 and 2 per cent of the population, whereas in
1997 it ranged from 2.5 to 4.8 per cent. However, the pattern of changes in the ageing
population has varied from country to country.
     If we use the ratio of over-80s to over-65s as an indicator we can eliminate the effects of
``downward ageing''due to a sharp fall in the birth rate (as in Italy). In Figure 1, which shows
the proportion of over-65s in the population as a whole along the bottom line, we can see that
there are ®ve groups of countries:
·                     Young countries (Ireland and Canada), with 11 to 12 per cent of the population aged 65
                      and over and about a ®fth of the population aged over 80;
·                     Relatively young countries (United States, Netherlands, Luxembourg and Finland), with
                      the proportion of over-65s ranging between 12.7 per cent in the U.S. and 14.5 per cent in
                      Finland;
·                     Spain, Portugal, Greece and Japan where there is already a high proportion of the
                      population aged 65 and over (between 15 and 16 per cent) but where the ratio of over-80s
                      to over-65s remains relatively low. These countries have slightly different patterns of
                      ageing from the European countries;
·                     The remainder of the European countries, where the proportion of over-65s ranges from
                      15 per cent (Denmark) to 17.1 per cent (Italy), but where the proportion of over-80s is
                      higher than in the southern European countries or in Japan (between 23 per cent for
                      Belgium and 26 per cent for Denmark);
·                     Sweden, where 17.4 per cent of the population are over 65 and nearly 28 per cent of the
                      over-65s are over 80, is the ``oldest'' country in the world.
                                                            According to the Eurostat predictions (1997), if we consider the proportion of over-80s

                                                            28                                                                                                                      Sweden

                                                            27
     Proportion aged 80 and over in the over-65 age group




                                                            26                                                                             Denmark
                                                                                                                                                      United Kingdom
                                                                                                     United                                       France
                                                            25                                       States                                           Germany

                                                            24                                                                                   Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                 Italy

                                                            23                              Canada            Netherlands Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                     Belgium
                                                            22               Ireland                                            Finland
                                                                                                                                                                   Greece
                                                                                                                                                           Spain
                                                            21                                                                                   Japan

                                                            20

                                                            19
                                                                                                                                       Portugal

                                                            18
                                                                 10    11              12              13            14               15                    16              17               18
                                                                                                 Proportion of over-65 in the total population


Figure 1: Ratio of very elderly in the population aged 65 and over to older persons in the total
                                          population
                            Source: Eurostat, DREES calculation.


# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                   669

in the population as a whole by the year 2020, this analysis will change signi®cantly. Two
southern countries, Italy and Greece, will become the ``oldest'', with respectively 6.8 and 6.3
per cent of their population aged over 80. The other countries with a score above the European
average, which at that date is projected to be 5.6 per cent, will be Germany, France and
Belgium, which will keep their relative positions. Spain will be very close to the European
average, just above Sweden, where 5 per cent of the population as a whole will be over 80.
Ireland, Denmark and Portugal will be the countries with the lowest proportion of over-80s
(3.3 per cent in Ireland, 4.3 per cent in Denmark and Portugal). Thus we can see that generally
speaking it will be the countries in southern Europe that become ``old'', while the countries in
the north will have a proportion of the very elderly much below the average. In Japan there will
be a spectacular rise in the elderly population: in 2020, according to the forecast by the
Japanese ministry of health, the population aged 75 and over will form 12.5 per cent of the
population as a whole, which will place Japan far ahead of the other countries.
     This increase, past, present and future, in the number of the very elderly is therefore
putting pressure on the care systems in all the European countries, with distinct patterns in
each group of countries: the southern European countries and Japan have to face a
spectacularly ageing population; France, Germany and Belgium are in a similar situation,
though it is slightly less severe.

3.   The main problems of dependency coverage
      Dependent persons need help both with the routine of their daily lives and for medical
reasons. These needs come generally under the umbrella of social protection, i.e. the social
services and the health services, and are not unconnected. Thus provision for long-term care
goes hand in hand with the provision of medical care. It is therefore not always easy to draw
the line between what concerns health insurance and what comes under the systems
speci®cally concerned with dependency. There are two consequences of this: ®rstly, the
orientations of the various countries with regard to long-term care coverage are generally
linked to their existing health system (and more generally to social protection) (summary
no. 1). Secondly, because of the multiplicity of the social actors concerned and their diversity
from one country to another, it is dif®cult to quantify the ®nancial amounts devoted to
®nancing dependency.
      In virtually all of the countries in the survey medical care is covered by the health
insurance system when individuals lose their mobility. Where insurance cover for long-term
care exists, its general purpose is to reimburse the expenses that arise from calling on the
services of a third person to assist with the essential day-to-day routine. In the countries where
there is only a system of social welfare, the local authority bears the cost of caring for those
below a certain income level. With regard to the accommodation of dependent persons, it is
possible for the local authority or the pension funds to carry part of the costs that arise from
adapting the home to their needs. By contrast, the long-term care services do not generally
carry the costs related to accommodation, which, if they arise, come under complementary
social assistance.
      We may distinguish three main groups of countries from the point of view of their
institutional systems (Table 1). In the Beveridge-type countries long-term care is generally
provided by the local authorities who organize home-based services. In some of the
Bismarck-type countries, dependency is recognized as a new risk. In southern Europe the
main system is one of social welfare. Apart from these differences, the main areas of concern
with regard to dependency provision are the following: Is there a suf®ciently large market of


                                               # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
670                                                                                                           ASSOUS


                                                Table 1:
                    The main types of institutional system for dependency provision
                                        Dependency: a new risk Approach based
                  Beveridge-type      (date when the new system primarily on
                  responses                  was introduced)         social welfare
                  Denmark                    Germany (1995)             Belgium
                  Sweden                      Austria (1993)             France
                  Finland                  Luxembourg (1998)             Greece
                  Netherlands3             Japan (01/04/2000)            Spain
                  United Kingdom                                        Portugal
                  Ireland                                                 Italy



the dependent elderly? Does the existing provision tend to favour informal care? And ®nally,
what is the level of dependency bene®ts? ± a level which logically should increase as the level
of family involvement decreases.

    Summary no. 1
                                     Healthcare and social protection systems

    In Europe (and in Japan), the social protection systems are based on two models:
    ·     The Bismarck model, which is still in use in Germany. This system of social
          protection is designed to cover the worker and his family against social risks that
          deprive him temporarily or permanently of his job and of his income. Using a
          system of income-based contributions, this form of social protection guarantees the
          worker's previous standard of living by paying him a replacement income. This type
          of insurance scheme is described by Esping-Andersen (1993) as ``conservative-
          corporate''.
    ·     The Beveridge model. This system of social protection aims to cover the whole
          population against social risks. It implements direct rights called universal rights,
          awarded to all the residents of a country, uniform for all and ®nanced by the
          taxpayer. The Scandinavian model should be seen separately from the English and
          Irish models. According to Esping-Andersen's typology, the social-democratic
          Scandinavian systems are based on a universal principle: their aim is to ensure
          social cohesion and improve living conditions. The so-called ``liberal''systems in
          the U.K. and Ireland are less generous: they are exposed to market forces and a
          major part of social policy is directed towards the poorest sections of society (rather
          low levels of bene®ts are available subject to means-testing).


       3
         In the Netherlands, a special fund for exceptional health costs (AWBZ), introduced in 1968 and ®nanced by
the taxpayer, is available to all residents whatever their level of income and covers long-term care where the cost is
considered too high to be borne by the individual or adequately covered by a private insurance. At ®rst the AWBZ bore
the whole cost of residential care. Since the early 1980s the ®nancial contribution on the part of the user has been
increasing.



# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                          671

   The European countries have therefore progressively moved away from the standard
   models and the differences between the systems of social protection have generally
   become blurred. In fact there is more of a tendency for the systems of most of these
   countries to converge, adopting as they do more and more frequently elements that
   derive both from the Beveridge and the Bismarck models. Currently the European
   Union has three main categories of health system (Table 2): the national health services
   of northern Europe, the continental systems based on health insurance schemes
   supported by the state and the mixed systems of southern Europe, very similar to the
   continental countries, but with their own characteristics (major institutional fragmen-
   tation of the income maintenance systems; but on the other hand universal health
   systems).


                                          Table 2:
                               The main types of health system
           National health systems       Systems based on      Mixed systems in
           in northern Europe        insurance health schemes southern Europe
           Denmark                            Germany              Spain
           Finland                             Austria              Italy
           Sweden                             Belgium              Greece
           United Kingdom                      France             Portugal
           Ireland                              Japan
                                            Luxembourg
                                            Netherlands



3.1.   Complementarity between the various types of coverage
      Given the complexity of the systems that cover long-term care it is dif®cult to evaluate
the global sums that are allocated to this area, each type of institutional system having its own
method of measurement. A recent OECD report nevertheless estimates the total cost of
covering long-term care for the elderly as between 1 per cent and 3 per cent of the GDP
(Jacobzone, 1999). According to this report, the levels of expenditure are lower in southern
Europe (between 0.2 per cent of the GDP in Greece and 0.6 per cent in Italy) than in northern
Europe (2.7 per cent in Sweden and Netherlands, 1.3 per cent in the United Kingdom).
      The level of agreed expenditure therefore remains rather restrained and in any event
considerably below the amount allocated to pensions or healthcare. Older people usually
receive long-term care bene®ts in complementarity to a pension.4 Dependency bene®ts must
therefore be viewed together with the retirement pension rate, with the levels of provision
offered by the social protection system and with healthcare coverage. It is therefore entirely
likely that some countries where the health and retirement schemes offer a relatively high
level of social protection have felt less than others the need to implement a system of provision
for long-term care, the elderly people in question being able to ®nance this risk out of their


      4
        By contrast with handicapped persons unable to work (before the age of retirement) who are in need of an
additional bene®t, besides the basic income necessary to be able to take on the cost of their dependency.



                                                      # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
672                                                                                          ASSOUS


own resources. Looked at the other way round, we may suppose that if dependency led to high
levels of coverage, expenditure on pensions would be lower, as the elderly would have less
need to protect themselves against this potential risk by saving or by taking out private
insurance.


3.2.     Co-ordination between the social services and the health services
      In most of the countries in the survey, the social services and the health services are
separate structures, and so they often operate in a rather disjointed fashion in relation to each
other. To deal with the problems that arise in this situation, most reforms concentrate on better
co-ordination or integration between the health and the social services. Frequently medical
care works out as more costly for the taxpayer but is often free to the user, whereas the social
services generally require a contribution ± sometimes signi®cant ± from those who use them,
but they are less heavy on the public purse. This situation may result in economic inef®ciency,
as individuals will naturally opt for the solution that is the cheapest for them; this may,
however, turn out to be the most expensive for the taxpayer or for the local authority as a
whole.
      Thus, for example, the Spanish social services, by contrast with the health services,
require a contribution from the individual towards the cost of residential care, so the
dependent elderly who turn to the health services get completely free treatment and those who
turn to the social services are deprived of three-quarters of their pension. This system,
together with the lack of co-ordination with the social services, has resulted in older persons
taking excessive advantage of hospital stays. Similarly, in the United Kingdom families often
put pressure on the use of the free hospital structures in preference to the social services. This
problem is nevertheless regulated by the number of hospital beds available for the dependent
elderly.
      In Germany, long-term care insurance is a separate legal entity from health insurance
even though all the applications for bene®ts go through the same health insurance scheme.
The decision to introduce a separate social insurance scheme to cover long-term care has not,
however, solved the problem of distinguishing between dependency and illness: the dividing
line between them remains just as blurred. Moreover the health insurance schemes are
reluctant to cover prevention and re-education, as then the dependency insurance schemes
would be the ones to reap any bene®ts of these treatments. So setting up dependency insurance
schemes in Germany has not resolved all the problems to do with co-ordination. With separate
budgets and roles that are not always suf®ciently well de®ned, what happens is that the
insurance schemes try to pass on responsibility, and the costs, to each other.


4.     Three main types of institutional system
4.1. The Beveridge-type schemes: an uneven level of protection in the Scandinavian
countries and a rather less generous system in the United Kingdom
     In the 1960s one of the special features of the Scandinavian welfare state systems was to
view the right to enter an institution to receive care as a basic citizen's right, which resulted in
the development of services of a very high standard, ®nanced by the taxpayer. In the 1970s
these countries started to question the justi®cation of giving this priority to institutional care,
both from an economic and a humane point of view, and homecare for the elderly became
much more widespread. Since then, in spite of the serious economic crisis suffered by Sweden


# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                            673

and Finland, the Scandinavian countries have tried to improve their care offer by making it
more ¯exible in order to enable dependent elderly people to stay at home.
      Today the high level of social protection and the extent of homecare services available to
the elderly in the Scandinavian countries are practically unrivalled. These Beveridge-style
countries have progressively reorganized their health and social services to respond to the
needs of the dependent elderly. They long ago integrated long-term care into the existing
public health and social services provision.
      In the domain of services to the individual, Denmark has acquired the reputation of being
the leader amongst the Nordic countries, both because of the early date at which it adopted the
concept of support within the community and because of the generosity of the services. In
Denmark the distinction between institutional accommodation and homecare was abolished
by legislation in 1987. The new notion is that of a ``habitat adapted to an advanced age''
combined with services provided according to the needs of the elderly person regardless of
their place of residence. These services are gradually replacing residential establishments.
The ®nancial contribution of the users is minimal even if the person is in residential care: since
1995 dependent people pay 15 per cent of their pension towards their rent and a ®xed sum for
accommodation and electricity. District nursing and medical appliances are supplied free of
charge to the user. Denmark is the only country where some home help is supplied to the
elderly.
      In the United Kingdom, the National Health Service (NHS) offers the over-60s
completely free access to the medical services, but the system of long-term care and medical
treatment turns out to be much less generous. State support for the dependent elderly is limited
to those with assets worth less than £16,000. In general, people with assets of over £16,000 pay
all of the costs until their income is reduced to this level (``spending down''), those with an
income of less than £10,000 per annum pay nothing, and the rest pay part of the costs. If the
dependent person has an income of over £16,000 but has only a small pension, the local
authority generally grants a full allowance, which is then recovered by selling the person's
home after the owner dies. A general review of long-term care and medical treatment is
currently being carried out in the United Kingdom. The Royal Commission on Long Term
Care made some proposals in 1999 to which the government replied in 2000.5 Amongst other
things, the Royal Commission suggested abolishing the means test for granting dependency
bene®ts, but the government did not agree to do this; on the other hand, from 1 April 2001 the
income threshold was raised to £18,000 and the value of a person's main place of residence is
not taken into account in calculating his or her ®nancial contribution to the ®rst three months
of residential care.

4.2.    The Bismark model of the welfare state: dependency is recognized as a new risk
     Most of the welfare states based on the Bismarck model have entered into or concluded
the debate on the creation of an insurance system speci®cally to provide for long-term care.
Recently, because they consider that the social provision is inadequate in the face of a
situation whose cost far exceeds the normal income of an individual, Germany, Luxembourg
and Japan have been looking at mechanisms that would provide funding for the demand.



      5
        These reports are available on the internet: the report of the Royal Commission is at http://www.open.gov.uk/
royal-commission-elderly/ and the government's reply is at http://www.nhs.uk/nationalplan/ltcreport.htm



                                                        # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
674                                                                                                         ASSOUS


      The form they have chosen is that of dependency insurance as a new branch of social
insurance. But it must be said that these countries have decided, primarily for budgetary
reasons, to take on only persons in the most dependent category and to set, in contrast to the
normal health insurance bene®ts, a maximum ®gure for bene®ts. Thus the German de-
pendency insurance scheme, in contrast to health insurance, does not provide total cover;
dependency is only covered beyond a certain threshold of ``high-level needs'' and for a stated
amount.
      In Germany, the law on dependency insurance which was introduced in 1995 guarantees
all the contributors to a state insurance scheme speci®c cover for long-term care regardless of
their ®nancial means or their age. Bene®ts are available to persons who require a ``substan-
tial''degree of assistance to carry out their normal daily activities over a period of at least six
months. The law de®nes three levels of dependency (need for assistance is de®ned as
substantial, serious or very serious) and also includes social coverage for family members
who care for a dependent relative.6 The cause of the dependency must be illness or physical,
psychological or mental handicap. In this way Germany is trying to link up dependency with
the health policy in the areas of prevention and re-education. The state insurance scheme for
long-term care is ®nanced by a contribution of 1.7 per cent of gross salary up to the social
security ceiling, shared equally between the employer and the employee for those in work.
Pensioners share the contribution payments in equal measure with their pension organization.
Government concern over the funding is shown by the exclusion of any federal responsibility
for any insurance de®cit that might arise.
      In the German system, workers whose income is below the social security level
automatically come under the state insurance scheme, both for sickness and for long-term
care (the bene®ts apply equally to all the bene®ciaries). The rest have a choice between
contributing to a state insurance scheme or taking out private insurance: 10 per cent of the
population are in the private insurance sector (once a person has decided to leave the state
insurance system she or he cannot return). The terms of private insurance for long-term care
are extremely well-de®ned: the schemes are obliged to offer bene®ts at least equivalent to
those of the state schemes and the ceiling of the premium is set at the level of the maximum
contribution to the state schemes.
      In Japan, the law on long-term care, which was adopted in 1997 and came into force on
1 April 2000, clearly marks a new departure with regard to dependency coverage. The law was
introduced to establish a new insurance scheme. In this system all residents aged 40 and over
are insured and pay contributions. The over-65s are covered if they need long-term care
whatever the cause of their dependence. Bene®ciaries under the age of 65, however, are only
covered by this system if the cause of their dependency is related to a geriatric disorder.


4.3. The situation in France and in the southern European countries: hitherto mainly a
pattern of social welfare7
     Although some countries have opted to set up a speci®c contribution scheme to cover the
costs of long-term care, most developed countries (including France, the United States and the



       6
         In 1998, 550,000 carers, of whom 90 per cent were women, were covered by this mechanismn.
       7
         Social welfare provides bene®ts and services to persons with too low an income to cope with needs generally
related to handicap, sickness, old age or social dif®culties.



# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                   675

southern European countries) have so far steered away from treating dependency as a new risk
supported by national solidarity.
      Dependency coverage in France at the present time is predominantly characterized by a
social welfare structure and also by a wide diversity of actors and sources of ®nancing. After
years of testing various schemes in the domain of allowances to the dependent elderly, in 1997
France introduced a speci®c bene®t called the Prestation speÂci®que deÂpendance, or PSD.
This scheme is on the point of being revised. The PSD, set up to gradually replace the third-
party bene®t scheme (Allocation compensatrice pour tierce personne, or ACTP) for persons
aged 60 and over, is a service in kind paid for by the French departments and de®ned as part of
an individual welfare plan. This bene®t, which is subject to a means test, is intended for the
most severely dependent persons: currently 135,000 persons receive this allowance (and
40,000 continue to bene®t from the ACTP), although the number of elderly persons who have
lost their mobility is around 800,000 (Kerjosse, 2001; Colin, 2000).
      The funds devoted to the PSD represent just a small part of the public effort to help
elderly persons who have lost their mobility. At the national level, the cost of medical care for
dependent persons is covered by the national health insurance scheme; and the social action of
the retirement schemes ®nances a major part of homecare by supplying home help. At the
departmental level, the local authorities (Conseils geÂneÂraux), who since decentralization have
taken over the responsibility for social welfare, have become the main decision-makers
according to PSD legislation (see summary no. 2). Awhole system of ®xed arrangements also
contributes to the ®nancing of dependency coverage: persons receiving the PSD or ACTP are
completely exempt from the employers' contributions related to the employment of a third
person. In addition, there are tax rebates known as ``emplois familiaux'' which allow
taxpayers to deduct 50 per cent of the sum they commit to paying a home help up to the ®gure
of FF45,000. This ceiling is doubled if the taxpayer or one of the members of his ®scal
household is the holder of a disabled card for at least 80 per cent disability. The costs of long-
term residential care or relating to a medical cure also entitle the bene®ciary to a tax rebate of
up to FF15,000 per person.
      The law to create an individual mobility allowance (allocation personnaliseÂe aÁ
l'autonomie, or APA) (which was voted in June 2001 and will come into force on 1 January
2002) is a reply to the main criticisms levelled against the PSD: that the latter is awarded to too
few bene®ciaries (because the access conditions are too restrictive and because it excludes
persons of average dependency) and presents too much disparity between one department and
another.
      The APA, which is to be paid to persons who have lost their mobility, regardless of
income, is to be of a standard amount throughout the country to pay for assistance received.
But only the lowest income brackets will be exonerated from paying the patient's contribution;
at the highest levels these may amount to 80 per cent of the bene®ts. This new scheme is to
be ®nanced by the departments and by the attribution of one point of a general social
contribution (contribution sociale generaliseÂe or CSG). This project may mark the ®rst stage
in France of recognition of a new life risk, even though for the time being this plan, which has
borrowed elements from other systems, is dif®cult to characterize.
      In the Mediterranean countries, the debate around the necessity for long-term care
insurance has had much less encouragement, no doubt because of an attachment to the family
models of informal aid or because the constraints on public funding are too great. In these
countries, as in France, bene®ts are awarded both within a contributory protection system
(such as those covering sickness, disability, accidents at work and old-age pensions) and
within the system of social welfare. Thus bene®ts to the dependent elderly are mainly awarded


                                               # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
676                                                                                          ASSOUS


on the grounds of handicap or old age, and in the case of the latter in the form of an increased
pension or tax deductions. In Spain, for example, families who have living with them a parent
aged 70 or over, and whose income is below a certain level, may claim exemption from part of
their income tax. This exemption is more than three times higher if the person is handicapped.
      Spain is currently implementing an ``Action Plan 2000±2005'' for the elderly which
includes some ambitious actions to modernize their system of dependency coverage. This is
characterized by far-reaching decentralization of the services and by involving the users in the
de®nition of the programme. Greece and Italy also have some special programmes which are
administered at the local level (which leads to considerable disparities).


    Summary no. 2
                                           The maintenance obligation:
                                      a perspective on the situation in France

    Civil-law countries differ from common-law countries with regard to the relationship
    between individuals, the family and the state. Common-law countries, with their
    individualist philosophy, refuse to let the government interfere in their private lives
    (Martin, 1997). There is therefore virtually no rule of law that orders family
    relationships. By contrast, the civil-law countries have always been concerned to
    guarantee a principle of mutual solidarity and legal obligations between the members
    of the same family.
       The main countries that uphold a system of compulsory support by the younger
    generation towards the senior members of their family are France, Germany, Austria
    and Spain. French civil law theoretically upholds a wide-ranging maintenance
    obligation, particularly of children towards their parents and grandparents and even
    their great-grandparents. In France the family is particularly called on to pay the cost of
    residential care for a dependent elderly person. In Germany, there is a ®lial obligation,
    subject to a means test, of children towards their parents. In Austria, in all the provinces,
    with the exception of Vienna where ®lial obligations have been abolished, there is a
    strict maintenance obligation which is nevertheless subject to a means test (Jensen,
    1999). In Spain, there is the possibility of participation by the family in the cost of
    covering dependency under the maintenance obligation, but this possibility remains
    theoretical as very little is done to implement it. In Sweden, the legislation concerning
    ``®lial duty'' was annulled in 1956, the government deciding that it had become
    ``obsolete and pointless''. Denmark for its part has never had any legislation of this
    type; Norway kept its version rather longer (SundstroÈm, 1999).

    Death duties: legislation that leads to unequal treatment
    In France, in the case of the PSD, the maintenance obligation is not immediate but
    deferred: members of the family are not required to contribute during the lifetime of the
    dependent person; on the other hand, the cost of care to the local authority may be
    deducted later from the bene®ciary's personal assets. The possibility of recovering the
    cost of social care when a person's main place of residence is sold after the death of the
    owner also exists in Great Britain and in the United States. In the United States, if
    the persons bene®ting from the ``Medicaid''social welfare programme in an institution


# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                            677

     are married, their spouse may keep part of their income and assets, but after the death of
     the bene®ciary, the federal state may recover the cost of social care from the ®xed assets
     of the deceased.
        In France until the end of 2001, if a dependent person uses the PSD, the payments
     may be deducted from their assets above the level FF300,000 before the remainder is
     redistributed to all the successors. In order to guarantee this possibility of recovery from
     the descendants, the administration may take out a charge on the property of the
     bene®ciary. Recovery can also be made from donations made by the recipient of the
     care bene®t after his/her application for care in the ten years preceding this request. The
     notion of a death duty, whatever the threshold ®gure above which it takes effect, raises
     very real psychological resistance, which explains why so many cases are abandoned
     during the procedure, or why an application for PSD is not taken out (Sueur Report,
     2000).
        These days application of the maintenance obligation is on the way out. In France for
     example, some departments have decided never to appeal to the relatives who would
     have a maintenance obligation towards an elderly person or, to give another situation, to
     approach their grandchildren. In any case, recovery of the sums paid out for social
     welfare is far from systematic: a decision is made by the access committee for social
     welfare on each individual case according to circumstances, a system which can easily
     lead to unequal treatment.


5.     Various modes of dependency coverage
5.1.       The essential role of the family and a predictable diminution in the scope of family care
      Although one may note a fall in the number of elderly persons living with their children,
the family is the ®rst natural support for dependent elderly persons. In most countries, most of
the caring is done within the family. This form of assistance, which is said to cost the social
services less than formal care, generally corresponds well with the expectations of the elderly
person. But it can be very varied, depending on whether the elderly person lives alone or with
other members of his or her family. From this point of view, the family con®gurations vary
considerably from one country to another.
      If we de®ne ``simple'' households as those where the elderly persons live alone or with a
partner, and ``complex'' households as those where they live with their children or in some
other con®guration, very roughly, the northern European countries have a different pattern
from those in the south.8 In southern Europe, the proportion of complex households is quite
high. In Spain in 1994, 54 per cent of the population aged 80 and over still at home lived in a
complex household. The same population accounted for 42 per cent in Portugal, 35 per cent in
Greece and 34 per cent in Italy. Other countries with similar patterns are Ireland, Austria and
Luxembourg. In the northern European countries on the other hand, there are very few over-
80-year-olds living in a complex household (2 per cent in Denmark, 5 per cent in Nether-
lands). In France (where the ®gure is 18 per cent), Germany, Belgium and the United
Kingdom, the situation is somewhere between the two.
      Even if we accept that the role of the family is primordial in supporting elderly dependent
persons, demographic changes are bringing about a diminution in the practical facilities for


       8
           The analysis that follows is based on the community family panel (DREES calculation).



                                                        # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
678                                                                                        ASSOUS


caring for the dependent elderly. Thus the ratio between the number of women aged between
45 and 69 (who are the principal carers) and persons aged 80 and over has diminished by about
a third in the OECD countries over the last 30 years. The present average is 3.8 in the European
Union and is expected to drop to 3.1 in 2020 according to the population forecasts of Eurostat.
In ®ve countries this ratio will remain stable (Sweden, Denmark, the United Kingdom,
Austria, Ireland). In the others it will go down. The countries where this diminution will be the
most signi®cant are Greece, Finland, Portugal, Germany and Italy. So in the future there will
no doubt be a considerable diminution in homecare capacity in the southern European
countries.
      Moreover in the industrialized countries there is a signi®cant rise in the activity rate of
women of working age. This general phenomenon, which has not yet affected all the countries
to the same degree, will of necessity reduce the ``care potential'' that might be supplied by
more mature women by limiting the time they have available for unpaid domestic duties. At
the present time the activity rate for women aged 45 to 59 is much lower in southern than in
northern Europe. Nevertheless it is probable that in the future the rate in the south will
approach that in the north, reducing even further the future potential for care within the family.
      Over and above these particular national contexts, which may be explained by
demographic and sociological differences, there are sometimes obligations of a cultural or
legal nature that lead to other divergences in the role of the family. In Japan, the role of the
family is preponderant. Although the ®gure is falling, the proportion of elderly persons living
with their children is over 50 per cent. This ratio, which is much higher than the average in the
other developed countries, re¯ects a particular form of family care: it is generally the son who
takes in his elderly parents and the daughter-in-law who looks after them (Ribault, 1999). In
Germany, the of®cial downward view of the family organization presupposes, in the absence
of evidence to the contrary, that the family is in a position to provide the necessary support. In
France, support within the family has always had a central place in social policies.


5.2.     Arrangements for encouraging informal aid
      In spite of the undeniable advantages that are universally recognized it is unlikely that
informal aid, particularly in the southern countries, can continue to play such a large
spontaneous role. In this respect a number of countries have already decided on the usefulness
of giving ®nancial support to intra-family solidarity by offering economic incentives.
      Thus in the last few years Germany, Austria, Luxembourg, Sweden, Finland, the United
Kingdom and Ireland have set up bene®t schemes aimed at persons who look after their
elderly parents, or cash allowances to elderly persons who have lost their mobility which can
then be used to ``pay'' the person who is looking after them in an informal situation. In
addition, in some countries these bene®ts are not limited to the immediate payments: in
Finland, as in Austria, Germany and Luxembourg, persons providing care for a relative can
contribute to a pension scheme and have access to other social advantages. In Japan, the hours
devoted to giving voluntary care provide the right to hours of free assistance later on,
following a principle known as ``capitalization of the time devoted to mutual assistance''.
      Another form of assistance awarded to carers is in the area of ``relief'' care, which
recognizes the need of carers to be able to free themselves from the heavy burden of looking
after a dependent person. Several countries have programmes of relief services (including
Germany and Luxembourg), but Finland has gone the furthest down this line, demanding that
local authorities provide one weekend of leave per month. These measures that are gradually


# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                   679

being set up, even though in a limited way at ®rst, are a ®rst step in the process of institutional
recognition of informal care.


5.3. The number of residential care places and the availability of homecare services are
generally interrelated
      The fact that the family is the ®rst potential assistant to a dependent elderly person is not
in contradiction with the development of a more formal care structure. An elderly person may
live at home and still have recourse to homecare services; she or he may also live in an
institution. The expansion of places in institutions nevertheless came to an end in the 1980s.
The rate of institutionalization has dropped in nearly all countries. Now the solution that is
generally put forward by governments is for home support, made easier by the development of
new home services.
      It is however important to distinguish between the nature of the institutional system of
dependency coverage and the existence of a suf®ciently large market, private or public, for
services to the dependent elderly (at home or in an institution). In fact, except in the
Scandinavian countries and Netherlands, who are very advanced in this domain, the need is
generally felt to develop the extent and the quality of the available services and often to favour
the creation of a market of private service providers.
      With regard to the number of beds and the services available, international comparisons
are made dif®cult by the absence of uniform data and because similar labels can refer to
different situations. The heading ``institutional care'', may cover various different situations,
from accommodation offering simple hostel services through highly specialized medical care
to long-term hospitalization. The growing databank deriving from various sources (Jacob-
zone, 1999; OCDE, 1996; etc.) makes it possible to distinguish three main types of situation
(Table 3). Denmark, Sweden, Finland and the Netherlands have a high proportion
of their elderly population living in institutions (about a quarter of the over-85s in the
Scandinavian countries and more than 8 per cent of the over-65s in Denmark, Sweden and
Netherlands) and in these countries more than 10 per cent of persons aged 65 and over receive
home help. In the southern European countries, as well as in Ireland and Japan, fewer than 5
per cent of the over-65s live in institutions (0.5 per cent in Greece and 5 per cent in Ireland);
similarly, fewer than 5 per cent of this population receive home help. In France, 7 per cent of
the over-65s and 2 per cent of over-85-year-olds are accommodated in institutions.

                                         Table 3:
      Level of development of long-term care establishments and of formal homecare
High percentage of persons in                             Low percentage of persons in
long-term care establishments/                           long-term care establishments/
more than 10 per cent of older                            fewer than 5 per cent of older
persons receive home help             Intermediate          persons receive home help
Denmark                                   France                      Ireland
Sweden                                  Belgium                        Japan
Finland                           The United Kingdom                  Greece
Netherlands                             Germany                        Spain
                                         Austria                     Portugal
                                       Luxembourg                       Italy



                                               # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
680                                                                                       ASSOUS


      This analysis shows that the demand for a place in an institution does not rise until after
the age of 80. On the other hand, the countries that prefer to accommodate the elderly in
institutions are also those where most of the elderly population receive assistance at home. So
homecare is not a compensation for a shortage of residential accommodation.
      Furthermore, and contrary to what one might expect, the typology that emerges from
these various data bears no relation to the composition by age of the elderly population, or to
put it another way, with the proportion of very elderly persons in the group of persons aged 65
and over. In fact, the group of countries where there is a high rate of use of institutional
accommodation includes the Netherlands, which is still a relatively ``young'' country,
whereas the group of countries where the rate of institutionalization is low includes Italy,
which has a relatively old population (see Figure 1). This distribution would therefore seem to
re¯ect the orientations of long-term social policies in each country and the changing patterns
of family life rather than the demographic situation.


6.     What types of dependency bene®ts?
6.1.     Bene®ts in kind or cash bene®ts?
     Traditionally, the Bismarck model of social protection attaches more importance to cash
bene®ts than the Beveridge model, which favours bene®ts in kind (offering direct services).
     However with regard to long-term care the European countries and Japan seem to have a
declared preference for assistance in kind. This is so that the sums that are paid out are not
used for some purpose other than their prime objective, or simply hoarded; and also because
most governments are generally in need of improving their offer of services. Thus, in Japan
the notion of offering cash payments to family carers was rejected, mainly because it does not
contribute to the development of the professional services (Ribault, 1999). Other countries,
such as Austria, opted for cash bene®ts to cope with the diversity in the lifestyles of dependent
elderly persons, as cash bene®ts can be awarded in a ¯exible manner by different services or
paid to a relative, thereby favouring informal aid. Austria, which since 1993 has offered a
universal ``care allowance'' to dependent persons who need to be cared for at home, an
allowance which is not part of the social security system, is nevertheless the only European
country to offer only cash bene®ts.


6.2.     Means-testing
      In most European countries the bene®ts are subject to means testing. In the countries
where dependency bene®ts are allocated within the framework of social welfare, the ceiling is
generally low (even though, as is currently the case in France for PSD, it may be higher than
for other social welfare bene®ts).
      This type of thinking goes against the recognition of dependency as a normal life risk
(which may concern everybody and sometimes necessitate care for a long period of time). In
reality, means-tested bene®ts were originally intended as a safety net for the exceptional cases
of victims more deprived than the average, or in the case of relatively rare temporary distress
(Kessler, 1997). In addition, applying a means test implies little participation in the system by
persons whose income is above the ceiling, and this might lead to debatable distinctions
between bene®ciaries and non-bene®ciaries (stigmatization of the bene®ciaries of social
welfare). In Germany, the main justi®cation given to explain the implementation of long-term
care insurance was that ``it is not politically admissible for an elderly person to have to spend


# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                            681

the whole of their retirement pension on ®nancing dependency services or to have to be
obliged to ask for social assistance in the case of dependency'' (Igl, 1997).
      The decision to provide means-tested coverage probably derives from the fact that a
policy of uniform bene®ts with no means test costs more for each bene®t awarded than a
service directed at only a limited section of the population. In addition, in the case of bene®ts
that have a high practical value (domestic help, for example), a policy of uniform bene®ts
could be open to criticism on ethical grounds. Why, for example, pay for all the domestic
services supplied to a well-off person as soon as that person becomes dependent?
      Note that in the case of medical care these criticisms are less pertinent inasmuch as the
services supplied do not have intrinsic consumer value. On the contrary, state coverage of
healthcare, with conditions determined only by the needs of the elderly person, agrees with
the principle of equality for all in matters of medical care (Breuil-Genier, 1996). But could
this principle not be applied to dependency coverage in its entirety?

6.3.    Is private insurance adapted to the problem of dependency?
      Until now there have been few indicators of a massive implication of the private sector in
dependency insurance. Even in the United States private insurance only offers (limited) cover
to less than 10 per cent of the elderly population (Wiener et al., 2000). In France at the end
of 1999, 18 insurance companies offered savings schemes or dependency insurance. The
number of contracts sold in France at the end of 2000 was 1 million.9
      There are several reasons for the small part that private insurance has played in covering
dependency risks. Firstly, surveys carried out in the United States show that most people
underestimate the risk of becoming dependent. Also, for the time being it seems that the
premiums required in dependency insurance policies are too high to appeal to a very wide
public ± either the elderly person cannot pay them or at that price the loss due to the immediate
expense is not compensated for by the hypothetical future bene®ts, especially when they are
policies with sinking funds (as opposed to life annuity policies). This slow development of the
private insurance market can no doubt be explained by the fact that in addition to the usual
insurance problems ± anti-selection (over-representation of high risks in the population
ensured), moral hazard (over-consumption encouraged by the insurance), and the fact that
insurers try to exclude bad risks (Bocognano et al., 1999) ± there are dif®culties in the case of
dependency in covering a chronic risk in a shifting demographic, economic and health
environment.
      The dependency risk is in fact chronic and, according to Breuil-Genier (1996), ``the only
way to insure this risk is to introduce providence mechanisms, involving contributions or
premiums spread out over part of the lifecycle, whereas the bene®ts themselves tend to be
concentrated at the end of life.'' Just as with a retirement pension, there is a marked time
dimension to the dependency risk. If, for example, we take the case of a private dependency
policy, the contract cannot be based only on the calculation of annual premiums re¯ecting the
anticipated expenditure for the current year. Policies have to be designed to provide a balance
across the whole lifecycle of the policy-holders.
      Pricing for dependency insurance products is therefore likely to be subject to wide
variations. There are several dif®cult unknown factors since the advent of dependency, the


      9
         For further details see Assous and Mahieu: ``L'assural biliteÂ de la deÂpendance et sa prise en charge par le
secteur priveÂ: une mise en perspective internationale'', forthcoming.



                                                        # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
682                                                                                                        ASSOUS


length of life in this condition, the change in life expectancy and in life expectancy without
handicaps are particularly dif®cult to anticipate. In addition it is unclear what the average
future cost of dependency coverage might be. This could be increased by the possible addition
of medical costs to the liability. Routine home help, based on acts that are not specially skilled
but that are very costly in time and often unrewarding, is also a service for which it is dif®cult
to calculate a future rate. Thus, whereas in a standard insurance policy the uncertainty factor
affects the difference between the expenditure of an individual and the average expenditure, in
dependency insurance the uncertainty factor essentially relates to the average level of
expenditure in the future.
     As the problems of dependency and how to ®nance it seem similar to those of retirement
schemes ± all the expenses are concentrated at the end of the lifecycle (obviously over a
shorter period for dependency than for retirement) ± opting to build up reserves that may be
used to ®nance the future cost of dependency coverage could be a good solution from an
economic point of view. Finally, a policy of actively preventing the dependency of elderly
persons, where one attempts to reduce the gravity of increasing dependency by developing re-
education programmes, might lead to a diminution in the ®nancial burden over the long term.

7.    Conclusion
      The Scandinavian countries and Netherlands are amongst the countries where
dependency coverage is very highly professionalized, with very few elderly persons living
with their children and a signi®cant proportion in residential care or receiving home help.
These countries are not expected to experience major dif®culties in the coming years as their
demographic situation seems fairly stable and population ageing well anticipated. The
situation in the U.K. provides a greater contrast.
      The southern European countries for their part tend to favour family care for a dependent
person. Formal care, in an institution or at home, remains very limited. With the exception of
Portugal, these countries are expected to experience more rapid and more pronounced ageing
than the European average, which is likely to result in a sharp rise in the demand for long-term
care. Up to the present in these countries the family has played a crucial role, with social
welfare sometimes complementing this traditional pattern. However it is probable that this
model will not survive. The number of working women is increasing and the number of
potential carers is diminishing, as is the habit of living with one's parents, and the number of
dependent persons is showing a rising trend. So these countries will most likely veer towards a
more formal system of dependency coverage.
      The countries that have a Bismarck-type system, with the exception of Japan (which is
fast becoming the ``oldest'' country), are generally in a mid-way situation between the north
and the south of Europe. In these countries the demographic and sociological changes are less
marked than in southern Europe. They seem nevertheless inescapable and the authorities are
probably not suf®ciently conscious of the combined consequences of future population
ageing and the predictable diminution in informal care.

                                                             REFERENCES
ASSOUS, L. and RALLE, P., 2000, ``La prise en charge de la deÂpendance des personnes aÃgeÂes: une mise en
    perspective internationale'', Document de travail collection eÂtudes, DREES, no. 1, 44 pp.
BADEYAN, G. and COLIN, C., 1999, ``Les personnes aÃgeÂes dans les anneÂes 90 : perspectives deÂmographiques, santeÂ
    et modes d'accueil'', Etudes et ReÂsultats, DREES, no. 40.
BOCOGNANO, A., COUFFINHAL, A., GRIGNON, M., MAHIEU, R. and POLTON, D., 1999, ``Concurrence entre



# 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
LONG-TERM HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE FOR THE ELDERLY                                                                              683

      assureurs, entre prestataires et monopole naturel : une revue des expeÂriences eÂtrangeÁres en matieÁre de santeÂ'',
      Economie et statistique, no. 328, pp. 21±36.
BREUIL-GENIER, P., 1996, ``La gestion du risque de deÂpendance: le roÃle de la famille, de l'Etat et du secteur priveÂ'',
      Economie et statistique, no. 291±292, pp. 103±117.
COLIN, C., 2000, ``Le nombre de personnes aÃgeÂes deÂpendantes d'apreÁs l'enqueÃte handicaps-incapaciteÂs-
      deÂpendance'', Etudes et ReÂsultats, DREES, no. 94.
ESPING-ANDERSEN, G. 1993, ``The Comparative Macro-sociology of Welfare States'', in Moreno, L. (ed.), Social
      Exchange and Welfare Development. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cienti®cas.
IGL, G., 1997, ``La prise en charge de la deÂpendance: quelques reÂ¯exions aÁ partir de l'expeÂrience allemande'', in La
      deÂpendance des personnes aÃgeÂes, 2nd edn. Droit sanitaire et social.
JACOBZONE, S., 1999, ``Les perspectives de prise en charge de la deÂpendance au niveau international'', Retraite et
      socieÂteÂ, no. 25.
JENSEN, J. and the OECD SECRETARIAT 1999, ``Les aides publiques en faveur des soins aÁ domicile des personnes
      aÃgeÂes deÂpendantes et leur impact sur les aidants feÂminins'', working paper, DEELSA, OECD.
KERJOSSE, R., 2001, ``La prestation speÂci®que deÂpendance au 30 septembre 2000'', Etudes et ReÂsultats, DREES,
      no. 98.
KESSLER, F., 1997, ``La prestation speÂci®que deÂpendance: premier commentaire de la loi no 97-60 du 24 janvier
      1997'', in La deÂpendance des personnes aÃgeÂes, 2nd edn. Droit sanitaire et social.
MARTIN, C., 1997, ``Protection sociale et protection par la famille en Europe du Sud : quelles speÂci®citeÂs ?'' in
      Comparer les systeÁmes de protection sociale en Europe du Sud. MIRE.
OCDE, 1996, ``ProteÂger les personnes aÃgeÂes deÂpendantes : des politiques en mutation'' in Etudes de politique sociale,
      no. 19, Paris, 343 pp.
RIBAULT, T., 1999, ``Care Services for the Japanese Elderly: Between Family Arrangements and Market
      Mechanisms'', Economic Research Center Discussion Paper, Nagoya University, no. 116.
SUEUR, J.-P. 2000, ``L'aide personnaliseÂe aÁ l'autonomie : un nouveau droit fondeÂ sur le principe d'eÂgaliteÂ'', report
      submitted to Martine Aubry, Minister of Employment and Solidarity.
SUNDSTRO     È M, G. 1999, ``Politique sociale et modes de vie des personnes aÃgeÂes'', in Comparer les systeÁmes de
      protection sociale en Europe du Nord et in France. Rencontres de Copenhague, vol. 1, MIRE-DREES.
WIENER, J., TILLY, J. and GOLDENSON, S. 2000, ``Federal and State Initiatives to Jump Start the Market for
      Private Long-Term Care Insurance '', The Elder Law Journal, 8 (1), pp. 58±99.




                                                          # 2001 The International Association for the Study of Insurance Economics.
